Congratulations on making it to the end of section 3 of The Complete Android develop because you've
covered a lot of stuff already in the course as well as making your currency converter app.
In the previous section in this section we've looked in Java in a lot more detail and we've covered
variable's arrays lists maps loops we've created random numbers as well as our little higher or lower
app.
And then we've looked at classes as well.
And also if statements so we're going to try and put as much of this together in this little app and
I've called this app number shapes.
There are two types of numbers that generally have shapes and they are triangular numbers and square
numbers.
And what we're going to do is create an app which allows the user to put in a number and it will tell
them whether it's a triangular number or square number both or neither.
Now this may not be the most useful app in the world but it will allow us to practice almost everything
we've covered.
And also does require you to do a little bit of searching online as well to find a couple of new techniques
that we haven't looked at yet.
You may even need to look up what a square number is if it's been a while since you've worked with them.
So that's it.
If you don't really sure where to get started then just follow along with my explanation but otherwise
give it a go.
Best of luck and remember to try and do it in an object oriented way with classes if you possibly can.
Best of luck.
All right.
I hope you managed it.
You may notice that I've actually settled in the browser rather than going over to Android studio and
that's because I'm actually going to create the logic for the app in the browser and then move it over
into Android studio.
And that's slightly more straightforward for me here because I can then run the logic several times
without having to compile the app every time.
So let's start afresh with a new hello world program get rid of that one line that we don't want and
then say as number shapes
so remember our main aim here is to work out whether a particular number is a triangle a number a square
number neither or both.
So let's start off with a number class.
You may notice now that I gave you a bit of a clue as to how we might set this out in the final example
of the previous video.
So here's our number class which is going to have our number variable contained within it.
And then our tests for is it a square number.
Is it a triangular number.
So let's start by creating a variable number.
And then all work first on whether it's a triangular number.
So let's create a public method that returns a boolean
and we'll call it is triangular.
Here we go.
Now let's just remind ourselves what is a triangular number.
So it's the sequence 1 3 6 10.
So the difference goes up by one every time.
So the way I'm going to test for a triangular number and you can of course do this many different ways.
I'm going to have a count of variable x.
So it acts with initials which is initially 1 and just like we had when we displayed the first 10 triangular
numbers a few videos ago.
I'm going to have a triangular number integer as well which will work my way up through the triangular
numbers.
And essentially what I'm going to do is keep generating triangular numbers until we get to the number
and either the number will be equal to a triangular number or white.
If it is then it is a triangular number.
If it's not then it's not.
So we want to keep going as long as.
So while how triangular number
is less than how number that we're working with and essentially we want to keep going up the triangular
numbers as long as this is the case.
So how do we build triangular numbers.
What we did before was increment our counter variable so X is now two and then take our triangular number
and add X to it.
So this will create a series of triangular numbers and it will keep on going until either triangular
number is greater than the number or triangular number is equal to number.
So once we're there we can check to see if triangular number is equal to number.
That means how number must be a triangular number because it's in the sequence of triangular numbers.
So if that's the case
then we guarantee return true.
But if it's not we're going to return false
and that's it.
That's how method for testing where the number is triangular or not.
Of course we should definitely test that.
So let's create our
new number.
Call it my number which has a new number.
Hopefully you're writing out this object oriented code quite smoothly now which is a big step forward
because it's by no means easy to get to grips with.
And then we'll set my number number initially.
Let's set it to a triangular number so say six for example.
And then because we're just testing I'm going to just output the result to the locks to the console.
So my number is triangular and then brackets.
And with any luck then that will return true because six is indeed triangular.
Let's take a look.
OK.
Looking good.
Let's try it on a non triangular number.
False.
Brilliant.
OK.
Just a couple more.
Ten is triangular.
So that's true.
20 isn't Fultz fabulous.
OK.
So we've got our is triangular test up and running.
Now we need to create an is square test.
So I'm going to do that up here.
So same as before public.
And we're returning a boolean and we'll call it is square
so already hopefully you can see the sensibleness of keeping all this logic in one place.
It just makes a lot of sense.
And then when we're working down here we don't really need to refer to the logic much at all.
Square number let's just have a quick Google is a squid number so square number is the product of a
number multiplied by itself.
So one is a square number because it's one times one.
Four is a square number because it's two times t nine is a square number because it's three times three
etc..
So probably the best way to test whether a number is a square number or not is to find the square root
of that number and see if it's a whole number.
So the square root of 4 is 2.
For example because two times two is four square root of 9 is 3 because three times three is nine.
Cetera.
So how do we find the squares of a number.
Well that's one thing we haven't covered yet so I would expect you to search for something like Java.
You can see I've already done it just to check that it's their Java.
There's a square root method.
Perfect.
That's exactly what we want.
So it looks like the method that we want is math not square square x.
So I'm just going to copy that and jump back over now just to check that this works.
I'm going say
do a quick test.
Say
let's take the square root of my number number.
We get.
Let's take a look.
So that should give us the square root of 20.
OK.
Fair enough.
Perfectly reasonable request.
I've said this is going to return a boolean and it doesn't say that's just for now returned true so
that we can run our code.
That looks like the square root of 20 to me.
Brilliant.
So that is exactly the function or method that we need.
So let's copy it again.
Here in.
So let's create a double
The square root like that.
And that's going to be math dot squirt.
And here I just want to square that number.
All right.
So if you're still with me the main thing I want to test about this is whether or not it's a whole number
because if it is then we're dealing with a square number.
If it's not then we're not.
That's another thing we haven't worked out how to do.
So let's do a quick google Java test.
Well again you can say I've been there just to make sure that everything is available on line.
So how to test if a double is an integer.
That's a perfect question for us.
So yes that's exactly what we want.
OK.
Let's say it looks like we use the math.
Top floor method.
So math top floor.
If you don't want to read that is a method that finds the integer below the number that we're looking
at.
So at the moment we've got say four point four seven.
So the integer below that is four.
So actually that makes a lot of sense.
If the number that we're looking at is the same as the number when rounded down then it must be an integer
or whole number.
So that's what we want.
I think if we have a look at the other part that tests whether it's infinite or not which probably is
not going to be relevant for us.
I'm just going to leave that bit out.
But if you want to just copy that in and it's not a major problem OK.
So this is our test so we want to test if we have one variable this time we want square root is equal
to a math top floor of the square root
then it is a square number so it returns true.
If that's not the case
returned false
There we go.
So just to recap we've found the square root of our number.
And then we've done a test to see whether that number is equal to that number when it's rounded down
which is just another way of saying is that number a whole number an integer and if it is then our original
number must have been a square number.
If not then return false OK.
So now let's use my number dot is square and of course we don't need anything in those parentheses anymore.
So 20 is not a square number.
So when we run this should give us false raw Let's try a square number then nine nine is a square number
and it's giving us true.
Fantastic.
I think I'll just try a couple more.
Fifty is not a square number so that's false.
But 49 is a square number and that's true.
So that's pretty good.
So now we've got a bunch of code that we can just copy straight into our app because it's so nicely
set out.
It doesn't involve any buttons or getting the value of text edit fields or anything like that.
It's nice and clean as far as that's concerned.
Which means we can just use it straight away.
And of course we could copy it into another app if we wanted to use this somewhere else as well.
So that's one of the advantages of this nice clean class structure.
So let's take this code and make number shapes.
So the Android studio
here we go.
So it's it a higher or lower app or I have at least.
So let's create a new project
we'll call this number shape's
and then all the usual default options that we get.
And here we are.
So this bit of the app should be relatively straightforward for you now.
It's very similar to what we've been doing in the previous two apps we just need to set up our layout
have our button and our text field and then run our class methods when the user presses the button.
So let's do a quick set up
I say will change that to the title number shapes and then
give it an ID as well.
Say number shapes and increase their size to maybe 30 espie and I'll just track that to the middle.
Lovely site number shape's.
And then we'll just have a bit of introductory text
to enter a number below to find out if it is a triangular number square number or both
we just change the ID to.
And we want that to be a little larger.
Try 18
fine
and we'll just stretch that out drag it down attach.
Natalie obviously we're not going for a great design at this stage.
We just want an app that functions and makes sense.
So let's drag in our number textfield and that's before
we can drag it out that way.
And we can also just change the width here as we've done before.
Great.
Which is a better way to do it if you're working with different screen sizes.
As you probably are.
And finally let's have our button
will change the text that the test number every day.
And so the ID by default of our added text is just text.
I'm going to change it to users number.
There we go.
And as usual our last thing is just to set the on click method.
Here we go and I'll call it test number make sense everything's the same.
OK.
All right.
So back over now to main activity Java and let's just get the basic logic of our apps in as we're fairly
used to doing now.
So we're going to create a public method which is not going to return anything and is called Test number.
It's going to be called by the button which has a type of view.
So that's going to send a new variable to our method.
Not that we're particularly interested in that but we have to be prepared to take it.
And this requires the view import over here.
So Android VI our view.
Hopefully this is becoming almost second nature to you now setting up the basic logic for an app and
then all I'm going to do here is get the value of the the edit text the text field that these is and
to then number into and then put it in the logs.
So if you remember we called the text field uses number.
So we're going to create an edit text or call it uses number and we're going to find a few by id and
we use resources dot ID dot users number every day.
And remember this is a view that we want to convert it to and edit text so we put that text in parentheses
before hand they would go and now can you remember how the LOEG using Android will stick with the Android
specific LOEG command.
They were locked out high and then
put users number in the first field and then we want to get the users number for the second field that's
just put in the import log framework.
An android you tail topped Loek and then to get the number.
We use our users number variable which is the added text itself and then get text and then convert it
to a string.
So we can put it in the logs.
There we go.
So let's just run that and make sure that we've set up everything correctly.
Always a good idea to do that before we start doing anything too complicated just so that we can make
sure that the errors in our complicated code not in our simple code precursor game will launch emulator
as usual.
And here we go.
Still it's open up right.
There it is looking good.
So let's just pop five and then test number and there it is fantastic.
So everything's fitting together nicely.
So I back over to our Java file.
I hopefully still have my class
code in the clipboard so I've just pasted it right in there so there's my number class.
Now this time I don't want to have those bits there but I am going to want them here.
At least to remind myself how I actually use the class.
So I'm going to create a new number and all I'm going to change here is instead of setting the number
to 49 every time I'm going to change the number to the value of the edit text field that the user has
entered.
So we're going to do the same as we did above.
So users number get text
and we're even going to convert it to a string.
But from that we want to convert it to an integer.
So you can see actually we've got the error there for horror.
Hover over that you can see that which required an integer which is excellent.
That's what we'd expect.
So let's give it one.
So we saw this a couple of years ago we use Integer Daut pass in
there we go.
And then we take out the string and we put that into that method.
So we're getting the text field and we're getting the text from that.
We're converting that to a string and then we're converting that to an integer
excellent.
And then that should just print straightaway to the Lokes whether or not it's a square number.
So let's test that as it is and if that works then we can be pretty sure that that's class code has
been correctly implemented in our app and all we need to do is get the user interface
working say that it displays something as a toast to the user
and take a look.
So let's do a square number.
First of all 14:9 true.
So you can get to 40 that's not a square number.
False.
Fantastic.
So you can see that that was a really smooth integration there that we just took our class code and
copied it straight in and started using it straight away.
So all that remains is to check whether the number is square is triangular is both or neither.
That's a little bit of a challenge to work out how to do it with the minimum number of if statements.
But as always there's a fair few ways to do it.
I'm going to do it like this.
So I'm going to start off to see whether it's a square or not.
And remember
because our square method returns a boolean.
I can just put it straight into an IF statement which is really nice.
So if the number is a square I'm then going to have another if statement directly in there and then
as nested if statements.
So I'm now going to check for it being a triangle and you can see that is predicting all methods which
is really nice.
The methods that we went are being incorporated into the ID itself.
So if we get to here that means that the number that we've got is square and triangular.
So let's have a message like we did before.
That reflects this.
And then we can have a single TOSed command happy at the end of the if statements.
So let's have a string message which is initially blank and then the message here is that the number
which you'll remember is my number number
and we're going to say is both triangular and square.
And I think a little exclamation mark would be would be fitting that.
And now before I do the rest of my if statements I'm going to set up our taste so that we can just check
this and make sure everything's working.
And then we'll put in the rest of the necessary IF statements say taste or make text and then we get
the context
the message is message and as usual we use length long and then we want to show that every I don't think
we need our log message anymore either.
So while this is compiling I'm going to need to think of a number which is both Square and triangular.
Fortunately there's a nice easy one.
But number one is both Square and triangular so I'm going to check that to see if this is displaying
as it should.
So if I put one in I should get my message.
One is by triangular and square.
Fantastic.
Out of interest what do you think will happen if I put two in at the moment.
We get a blank text because we haven't put in the options for other numbers yet.
So we're looking good so far.
So let's put an else statement here.
So I have a quick think what situation are we at here.
We know that it's square because this one told us it was square but we also know that it's not triangular.
So that's what our situation is.
So the message is my number number plus concatenated with
is square but not triangular.
Full stop.
That's not quite as exciting as being both triangular and square.
So I'm just going have a full stop there.
You can choose what you like.
So that's the first two options.
We've got both triangular and square and we've got square covered.
Now I'm going to put an else statement here.
So if we're in this chunk of code that means that the number is not square because this if statement
is not true.
So the numbers definitely not square so let's just have in fact we can just copy that code because our
code here is going to be very similar.
So if the number is triangular.
Now here we know that it is triangular but not square.
And again full stop them.
So here with Stephani triangular.
But it's not square.
And here means it's not triangular and it's not square.
So is neither square nor triangular I'm not saying if I run that it should give me a correct answer
for every number.
Let's take a look.
Keep your fingers crossed.
So I will try one.
Same as last time.
Both triangular and square.
Great.
Still working two should be neither.
Either triangular no square.
Fantastic three is triangular but not square.
There it is.
Fantastic Four should be square but not triangular.
Fantastic.
So that's all the different possibilities that we've had there.
And let's just check a few more that should be square but not triangular.
Gay and 28 should be triangular but not square.
Brilliant.
There's one extra feature I'm going to add here.
And that's to avoid this crash that we saw last time.
But I said as a challenge for you to do to fix I think there's a fairly easy way really to avoid that.
There are more technical ways as well which I'll see which we'll see later on.
But for now we're going to keep it very simple and we're going to just test at this point.
Thanks.
That's slightly earlier.
We're going to do a test here to see whether the user has entered anything and that will work because
we chose the number type.
Remember when we added the text field we chose the number type which doesn't allow even decimals.
It doesn't allow anything which isn't a digit.
So if the user enters anything here they can only enter a number.
So all we have to do is check to make sure that the user has entered something so we can create an if
statement here.
And we can get the the value of what they've entered.
So uses number to get text and then convert it to a string.
Now we need a way to test whether this is empty or not.
So whether it's an empty string that's not something we have officially seen before.
So let's jump over to Google and find out.
So Java test if string is empty.
Maybe gay
that looks like what we want to know.
Let's find an answer.
Here we go.
Now we know that the string is not going to be No.
Because we're getting the string from the edit text.
So there's definitely going to be a string there it's not going to be an existent but the string could
be empty.
So that's what we want we want to test the is empty method.
There we go back to android studio and pop is empty and then so if it's empty then all we need to do
is set the message.
He called to please enter a number
and if it's not then we can do everything else in the usual way that we get.
You can see it's done a really nice job of inventing things for me.
And it's also alerting me to a problem which hopefully you can see what it is.
The problem is we've defined the message down there and then used it up here.
So I just need to move the definition to the top.
There we go.
So now we've got a nice test to see if the string is empty or if they've entered nothing and if so we
give them a relevant message.
Otherwise we process that number.
So let's take a look.
Probably worth mentioning at this point that there are more advanced ways of doing this test and you
can essentially do the pass it and test whether that's been successful.
And that's a better method really than doing what we're doing here because this relies on the user only
being able to enter an integer and there may be some other options that we haven't thought of here.
So really the best thing to do is check that but we'll see how to do that later on.
If you want to jump ahead a bit there then google the Java try command.
That's the way to test whether a function or method has been successful or not.
But this should do for now.
Let's just have a look.
So now if we enter nothing we get a nice friendly message rather than an app crash which isn't great.
And just one more quick check.
Just make sure everything is still working.
49 is square but not triangular.
Fantastic.
So I hope you manage to do at least a good portion of that yourself.
It's quite a step up from what we were doing just a few videos ago really where we're creating our own
class with a variable within it.
And then two methods which we then use quite neatly down here to tell whether our number is triangular
square neither or both.
So that was fun.
I hope you are enjoying yourself so far.
You'll be pleased to hear that we are going to be an android studio for pretty much the rest of the
course and in the next chapter we'll be seeing how to work with images animation and sound.
I'll see you there.